- Hey, Koen, hey, YouTube.
- Hey.
- Hey, it's fantastic to be here with you,
and I'm looking forward to talking about sports
and Python and data science and all that,
so let's just jump right into the show.
Koen, welcome to Talk Python to Me.
- Yeah, thanks for having me.
Really cool to talk about this topic.
- Yeah, I'm real excited to have you here at the,
you have quite a collection.
You have quite a collection of libraries.
Now, up front, these are not all your libraries, right?
These are sort of a kind of an awesome list of Python,
and even beyond Python, sports, libraries, datasets,
APIs, models, everything, right?
Yeah, yeah. I think it's for people...
It was quite hard to find open source packages,
and I tried to collect everything I could find
find and make it available for everyone to find what they need.
Yeah, it sounds like a great mission.
And as people will see, there is a bunch of stuff that we'll get to talk about.
So I noticed not absolutely every sport is covered there,
but many of the popular sports are covered.
And if you're interested in sports, I think also if you're interested in just
Just examples that connect with people, right?
Imagine you're a university professor and you don't want to use the New York City tax
data one more time.
You want to say, well, maybe people are into soccer, American football, or NBA, whatever
it is, right?
Maybe you could come up with something more interesting.
F1.
- Yeah, definitely.
There's quite some cool data available to use
in your courses.
Yeah, absolutely.
- Yeah, yeah.
Also, if people are members of some kind of club or team,
maybe they could use some of this
to bring some cool visualizations or analysis
to their own organization, right?
- Yeah, yeah.
That's also one of the things that PySports
likes to encourage to use open source packages that are already available instead of building
your own stuff because that actually happens a lot. So that's also one of the part of the
mission of PySport to make people aware of what's already there and try to bring people together.
Yeah, one of the big problems not problems
It's an opportunity, but it's also a challenge of python. You know, if you go to pypi.org right now, there's
453 000 packages
I didn't know the number but that's quite a lot. Yeah, we're coming up on half a million
And if your goal is to work with some specific data set or try to solve a certain type of problem
Often the hardest part is figuring out. Well, what library do I use does it exist?
And if so, is it up to date and all of these things?
So having a list like this,
a place that aggregates it and sorts it,
filters it, super neat.
So I'm really looking forward to talking to you about it.
Before we get to that though,
just give us a quick bit on your backstory.
How'd you get into programming in Python?
- Yeah, this is an interesting story.
I think I started programming when I was,
I think around 12, when I get the Lego Mindstorms,
the Lego that you could also program.
My father gave me a visual basic book and I should just figure it out.
So that's where I started with programming and then during high school I also did web development with PHP.
I'm not really sure at what age, but eventually I ended up with, I think, the first search
engine.
And they want to, yeah, they need a Python developer.
And I didn't really know Python, but that wasn't an issue.
So there I learned Python.
And from that point on, I only, or mostly used Python.
Python. Yeah. Okay, I forget this PHP stuff. Go in Python. Yeah, well, to be honest, we,
my company, we still use PHP. Because well, it works quite well. The performances is okay. I'm
not really sure if I'm allowed to say it on this show. But yeah, it also had some advances.
Yeah, absolutely. Well, I mean, almost every language has some
something it's particularly good at and reasons to keep using it. And also, there's just tons of
software that was written, you know, pick your language, written in that language, and it still
works well. And, you know, there's plenty of reason to just keep going with it, right?
Yeah. But yeah, Python is now really my language of most interest and what I really use on my
day-to-day work. Excellent. Yeah. So yeah.
Yeah, cool. What are you doing these days?
Are you still working at the search engine? No, that was quite a while ago.
I also worked at a huge online marketing agency
around the software department and we created tools to
collect all the data from all kinds of different sources and make it available for the teams.
Right now I'm running my own company, it's called Team TV, where we provide all kinds of tools
where we use video and data for example performance analysts but also for highlight
creation or live streaming just to make sure that we try to combine video and data in all
possible ways within sports domain.
Yeah, that sounds like a really interesting thing to be working on.
Yeah, I started mostly on the video engineering part.
So we built quite some stuff ourselves there.
So from people uploading huge amounts of footage
that we need to transcode and how to scale it,
how to serve it.
So that's stuff we build ourselves.
Yeah, later on, we keep on building more stuff around data
and always keep the combination between data and the video
because, well, you can see some sort of metric,
but you always want to see the footage behind it
to actually understand the context of it.
- Yeah, sure.
Well, it sounds really fun.
And you're also involved with PyData Andover,
is that right?
- Yeah, yeah.
So I think for even faster.
Yeah, yeah, five years ago,
we started with PyData Eindhoven.
We were already friends with PyData Amsterdam.
So they said, well, maybe you should also start
on Eindhoven chapter.
I think this year will be the anniversary,
the five-year anniversary for PyData Eindhoven.
And it's, yeah, it's amazing community.
And that's, yeah, also inspired me
to start with PySupport.
I'm not really sure if people that are listening
to this podcast know PyData, maybe, I think.
- Yeah, I would suspect most probably do.
At least the data science inclined among us.
- Yeah, so yeah, I can tell a little bit about it,
but I think right now we have a nice way
of organizing the meetups and trying to get more people
involved and talk about data science and share knowledge.
And then once a year we have the conference
where we try to get, yeah, collect money
that we can send to NumFocus
and they can share it over all the open source projects.
So yeah, it's a really amazing community.
- Excellent, and NumFocus does a lot to support
the bigger data science oriented projects.
Yeah. - Yeah, yeah.
- I think that's kind of unique amongst the,
in the Python space.
You know, there's not really anything like that in the web or in UI.
You know, there's not a lot of areas where it's like organization that says,
okay, we're going to try to find the popular projects and support them.
Yeah.
Across organizations, right?
Like people support flask, but they don't also support Django at the
same, in the same sort of organization.
Right.
Yeah.
But I think it's also an opportunity for all the companies
that are using those open source packages to give back.
And I think from doing it through NumFocus,
that makes it also easier because they use a lot of packages
and can just donate to NumFocus
and they will make sure it's distributed
over those packages.
- Right, absolutely.
if you use pandas, you should also support NumPy, right?
Because that's kind of the foundation and so on.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Interesting.
Oh, that makes a lot of sense.
All right, well, let's jump into sports
and your project, PySport.
There are other people who are maintainers
and working on this, or is this just your project?
- Well, to get the meetup that we had,
Just a couple of weeks ago, we had some more people collected.
And now we are building from there on to get more people involved with just PySport.
But one of the projects we built with PySport is the Kloppy package.
And there we have worked together with Jan van Haaren,
he's a head of data science at Club Brugge,
a big club in Belgium.
We had the main maintainers there,
but I think right now we have 22 contributors to the package.
So there's quite some people contributing there.
Yeah.
Yeah, that's a big group.
That's a lot of people contributing.
Yeah, so let's start this way.
Tell people what PySport is and about that.
And then we can talk a little broadly just
sports analytics before we get into the details.
The most important mission of PySport is to
to bridge the gap between the clubs and the sports analytics
and just people and by using open source packages because a
A lot of clubs are using open source packages.
Open source packages are used by the clubs
and people want to have a way to contribute
to their favorite club.
And I think a lot of people are still struggling
on how to do it.
And with PySport, we want to share the knowledge
and teach people on how to do it.
So we try to get the experts from the clubs,
but also getting the knowledge from,
you know, like pandas or other big packages
and see how we can get all that knowledge
into the sports analytics community.
And with Kloppi, we try to set an example
on how to build such a package,
how to work together on such a thing
and also encourage people to contribute
and show that you don't have to create a pull request
that there's a major refactor,
but also like minor things like typing errors,
fix in documentation and show people
that's also very valuable to a package.
- Right. - Yeah.
- Interesting, so CLOPi is standardized soccer tracking
and event data, right?
So you started out with soccer or as I guess,
a lot of the world might refer to it as football,
but in the US, that's our namespace.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, it's sometimes, yeah, it's difficult
if we're talking about football.
But here in Europe, we call it football,
but yeah, for the package, because it's international,
so worldwide, I call it soccer.
- Yeah, yeah.
Namespace, namespace.
So, yeah, so give us a quick bit of background on Kloppy,
but since it's kind of one of the founding,
you created this as a way to sort of set an example, right,
for how to create a package and that helps people
understand this event, this club data.
- Yeah, so what, where that started is on Twitter,
there was already quite some people talking about
sports analytics, of course, and one guy, Joe Mulberry,
he's working at a Danish top club.
He asked for help because he created a notebook
and he wanted to build a Flask API on top of it.
And I said, well, I know Python.
I don't know really much about soccer or about data,
but yeah, I would like to be involved.
I would like to help you.
And when I received a notebook,
I noticed that like 80% of the code was about reading
and standardizing the data to a format
that he could work with.
When we talked about it, it seemed like most,
at least a lot of people are struggling with that issue
and doing the same thing over and over again.
Because in more notebooks that I saw,
people were doing the same thing, but in different ways.
And some are not correct implementation
or inefficient implementations.
So I thought, well, one thing I know is how to read data
and how to get it into a standardized format
because that was also one of the things I did
at an online marketing company.
Yeah.
- Like I don't know much about your data format
but I know about data and analyzing it and all that, right?
- So yeah, I built a package start with just tracking data
but also try to explain what the next steps could be.
And then people said, well, this is really useful.
And from that part, I kept on adding
these serializers for different kinds of data,
for the tracking data and also for the event data.
Yeah, I tried to get knowledge
from non-sports bigger projects.
So I also got, Will from the textile package.
He also did several reviews on this, package and, and, give feedback to,
yeah, to try to get the package on a, on a higher level.
So people within sports and list community could also, gain
more knowledge from there.
Um, but maybe also good, a big, a small, a small background on, on the,
The data, so the tracking data,
it's like positioning data for all players on the pitch.
I think it's most of the time 25 frames per second.
So you know the location for each player and the ball.
And on the other side, you have the event data.
So all passes and shots and things like that.
- Right, at this time from this position,
there was a shot on the goal or there was a pass
or there was a takeaway or...
- Mm-hmm. - Yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, that's the event data.
Yeah, and all the vendors use different formats.
- Yeah, yeah, oh geez.
That sounds hard.
So first of all, 25 Hertz of all the people's location.
This is beyond somebody with just a pen and paper
and notebook writing down,
oh, at this time there was a shot on the goal by number 25.
How do they get that data?
That's crazy.
Yeah, it's quite an advanced systems that I use.
So in the stadium, I think, they have like 20 cameras, around the pitch.
And they use computer vision to, yeah, to detect all the players and combine it.
Uh, but I believe, and I'm not really sure if the already, if I'm not on
the market that do it totally automated, but I think from the system that I'm
currently used in soccer, there are still some people needed
for difficult situations like a corner kick,
where a lot of people in a small area,
and a lot of occlusions happen.
- You can't see the numbers, yeah.
- Yeah, they can't see the numbers.
So just after a corner, some manual operator
has to reassign some players or correct something.
But it's quite an advanced system already.
- It sounds incredibly advanced.
It sounds like an awesome data set to work with
because with that much data, you really
can make a lot of interesting predictions and trends.
I mean, at some point, maybe we'll
just put some sort of tracking RFID thing
on the back of the player's head,
just stitch it on there, and then you fully automate it.
>>Jorrit: I think--
>>Luis: Never mind.
>>Jorrit: --a socket that they could--
yeah, maybe, yeah.
Not sure if all players would accept it.
But for example, on ice hockey, yeah, you can put on a helmet.
- Yeah, you could put it on the how much, sure.
- For football, then, yeah.
- Yeah, things like automobile racing,
you know, they have, not all of them,
but for example, F1 has incredibly high frequency
of like points that measure where's this car,
how fast is it going?
The cars are sending out real-time telemetry.
There's certainly many sports
that have quite high fidelity in their data.
Yeah, I must admit I haven't seen the data from everyone yet, but it would be really
interesting to learn from them and how to work with data and see what can be applied
to football or soccer or the sports.
I bet it's a lot actually.
I bet it is just in terms of actual quantity of data, how fast are sampling, how many cars,
for how long.
It's probably a lot of data.
Cool.
All right, let's go.
Yeah, go ahead.
Yeah, that's also one of the interesting things about working with sports data, I think the
data engineering part.
And this package just focused on reading the data, but then the next step, yeah, how to
work with data, especially if you would like to use the tracking data for a whole season.
That's quite some data that also pandas can start struggling a bit with.
You know, it just occurred to me, there's probably a whole nother demographic or aspect
who would be interested in this kind of data.
It would be like sports betting people.
I mean, not that I have any interest in that at all, but, but if you were trying to figure
out like, okay, if this team plays that team, if you can understand, okay, this, their star
player, you know, if we match up their moves against the other person's moves, it turns
out there's a weakness in this way for their defense or who knows, right?
I mean, there's probably with that much data, there's probably some interesting stuff you can do.
Yeah, I think that a lot of vendors of the data also have the, yeah, the betting industry as well
as their clients, because yeah. Yeah, I really care to work for them or support them.
It's a little bit shady, I suppose, but it does seem like you could, it's almost like a really
detailed information about companies for the stock market.
This is kind of like a little bit like that for the sports betting in some ways, I suppose.
Yeah, yeah.
Interesting.
Okay.
So I think one of the challenges here is probably a lot of this data is not easily offered up.
There's probably not a lot of JSON APIs with low latency
that are super easy to access.
For some, there must be, but not...
There's probably a lot of data out there that is not overly welcome
to either be given out or is given out in batch over slow periods
or something like that.
Maybe speak to a little bit about the data availability.
Yeah, that's quite an issue.
And I know mostly about the soccer data,
but I can imagine that the same applies
to most of the other sports.
And I think data availability is a major issue, at least
if you want to encourage the community to work with it
and do research on it and get people--
Yeah, build more cool stuff without being within a club.
There are some companies that already provide
quite a big set of open event data.
Stats Bomb is one of them.
I think they provide around 1,500 data sets for event data.
But if you're looking at the tracking data,
and maybe like 10, maybe 15 sets available.
sets available because all those vendors have deals with the leagues and they are not allowed
to share it so you have to know someone within a club and yeah. Or use a beautiful super scrapy
or something like that. Yeah that's the other option but then it's still very hard to get
get the tracking data because I'm not really sure
if you can actually scrape it.
But that's, it is one of the things that I noticed
when working on the open source of PySpot website
that are really a lot of scrapers.
And I think that's an indication that there's an issue
with data availability.
- Yeah, it's not, this plugs into the API,
but this is a scraper.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
It's worth pointing out or throwing out a bit of word of caution just because the website
is publicly available and you can hit it with some kind of scraping tool. That doesn't mean you
legally can do stuff with the data. You probably want to be pretty careful about that, right?
Yeah, because I think even when it's not explicitly mentioned, most of the times it's
not allowed to scrape the data at all but also in a soccer there are quite some websites that
explicitly are forbidden. So the packages are there and it's also a bit
I was thinking about should I include them or should I not include them because they kind of
encourage non-legal actions, but yeah, not really sure about it.
Yeah.
Yeah, sure.
It's, I can see the case for both sides of that, but I just want to, you know, let
people know, like, just be careful with what you do with the data.
It's one thing if, oh, it's an academic research project and it's just for my
own interest or whatever, but.
Yeah.
If you start scraping that entire website and trying to make money out of it, you
- You should not do it.
- Or find a way to do it legitimately, right?
But just don't sneak through.
All right, well, I think it might be fun to,
let's talk through some of the packages you have here.
So if you go to pisport.org and there's a nav bar
and on the left it says open source.
And if people click that,
then they end up with a whole bunch of,
and I'll open it just this way for a moment.
We can look at it and talk about it.
So if you just click on it,
it actually, there's a delay as it downloads.
- Yeah, there's still something I need to fix
because yeah, it's quite some time.
- This is not a complaint.
It's just, I don't know how many pages that is,
but that's a really small scroll bar.
But what I noticed that's pretty cool is you can go in
and there's a filter that you all have
and you can filter by your language.
Right now you have Haskell, Python, and R, and others.
And then you can pick by sports,
and then you can pick by type of thing, right?
So I filtered our discussion down to Python libraries
just because, you know, the--
- We have a single app for--
- Yeah. (laughs)
And you could also pick amongst the different types of tools.
So we talked about the scrapers,
and probably to a lesser degree, the APIs, right?
The API clients, which is cool.
There are some in there, they say, "Here's the API,
and we just built a strongly typed package,"
rather than just doing straight REST, which is great.
But you also have models and calculators
for predicting things, and then I/O for file formats,
visualization, open data, and databases.
- Right? - Yeah.
I encourage people, rather than try to read the whole list,
which is hundreds and hundreds of packages,
to filter down maybe to the sport you're interested in,
or a couple of sports or the type of tooling
you're interested in, yeah?
- Yeah, I think filtering is a must,
but maybe if you have plenty of time,
you could just scroll and see what's interesting
because it's still, I think, a very interesting list
to see just what's available and get inspiration.
Yeah. - Yeah.
- It's quite a list, yeah.
- Yeah, so what's the sort here?
If I come here, how does this get sorted?
Like, is there any meaning to the order they appear?
Is it just when they were entered or?
- Yeah, that's a good question.
I need to look it up.
Because one thing I did is I also open sourced
the data collection part of this website,
but it's daily collected,
at least to provide an update.
I think, I must say, I think there's an order
when I added the packages, I think that's the order of here.
But to be honest, it can be pretty random.
- Excellent, all right.
So here, I'll just sort of go through
a couple of the scrapers here
and we can maybe dive into one or two potentially.
So there's Pyball, and we'll just go through
just to give people a sense, right?
- Yeah. - Of that one here, right?
So there's Pyball, which is a Python API, nice,
wrapper for stats.nba.com with a focus on NBA
and WNBA applications.
That's pretty cool.
I don't know anything about stats.nba.com,
but it looks like, yeah, this is a whole website
with all sorts of data.
It's got players, teams, leaders.
Looks great, actually.
- Yeah, I think quite some people
are also using this package.
And I think it's the mostly used package
when working with basketball data.
Indeed, it's nice that they used the API
to get this data.
Yeah.
>> Yeah.
You get quite a bit of data here.
You've got like the player, their team, their age, their total number of points scored.
Yeah, a lot of stuff you can do to sort of compare them.
And yeah, it's great.
>> Yeah.
So if you're into basketball, I think it's a great start.
It's also quite actively maintained.
That's also one of the things that I intentionally mentioned on the list, because some packages
are not really maintained well.
And yeah, I think it's a benefit.
Yeah.
One of the things in the list that you call out is the number of contributors, the latest
version, when the last commit was to the package.
That's pretty cool.
Yeah.
In the beginning, I thought, well, maybe I can just manually update the list.
But then I decided, well, I think data engineering is fun. Let's find a way to
automatically fetch the data and update it. And also the license is pretty important
to show it here and also last commit to see how actively it's maintained the latest version and
also the contributors because I think it's good that some packages have some more contributors that
you... Sure the difference between a package with one contributor and one with 30 contributors
that's a big difference. Yeah I think it's also good for people to see if there's
as a package with just a single contributor
that might give an opportunity to contribute to it
or work together.
So, PySpot would like to encourage people
to get involved in those projects.
- Okay, yeah, that's a good idea.
- So, yeah, that could help out here.
- Yeah, and each one of these packages,
you can go in and open the details here,
and it gives you a little bit more information.
Like, for example, it actually lists the contributors
and links to their GitHub profiles
and their website and the GitHub page and IPI and so on.
- Yeah, and also you can look,
click on one of the contributes
and see what other packages they built.
- Oh, really?
Okay, so like if I click on this one,
yeah, they've done this one.
- Well, this one, just a single one.
- Yeah, I just come up with,
they might have worked on multiple.
I know Dependapod's worked on a few.
(both laughing)
- Yeah, that's a really nice contributor.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Absolutely prolific open source contributor.
- Yeah.
- Works on my project too.
(laughing)
Yeah, I didn't realize you could actually see
all the projects that PySport knows about
that that particular user works on.
That's a cool, cool aspect of it.
- Yeah, so I spent quite some time on fetching all the data
and trying to combine it.
Also fetching data from Py and also do the similar
for the R packages.
Yeah, and seeing how to get all available data
on one place.
It's also tries to fetch images or screenshots
from the read me's of the report stories
that works for some.
- Oh yeah, that's nice.
Screenshots can be very helpful.
Less important on the scrapers,
more on the visualizers probably still.
- Yeah, yeah, definitely.
What is opensource.pysport.org written in?
- It's written in React using Next.js.
So it was also quite an adventure for me
because it's the first application
that might also explain why it's still a bit slow on loading
because I didn't really dive into how to make it faster.
It should still win,
but in the backend it's Python, it's using Luigi.
- Okay.
- For, that's, I still think it's a pretty interesting tool
because it's really simple to set up
like orchestration of some tasks.
And--
- Right, like the daily scraping,
the updating of the packages and that kind of stuff.
- Yeah, yeah.
- Okay.
And there's a GitHub action that runs on a daily basis
and then fetches all the data and updates
and commits it in a different branch.
And that one gets deployed to Verso, I believe.
- Okay, very interesting.
- But if you're interested in the source,
you can also, it's also open source.
- Okay, great.
So Piebald for NBA, we have the Hockey Scraper,
which is for scraping NHL play-by-play and shift data
with six contributors.
That's pretty interesting.
- Yeah, so I think what you'll see on the filter list
for every sport as a pixel for the NHL, for ice hockey,
gets a little bit less maintained, I think.
But I have to, I'm not really sure if it still works
because with those scrapers, it can work today
and not tomorrow.
- Yeah, as soon as the,
and it doesn't even necessarily mean
that they were intentionally blocked, right?
It could just be, hey, we've redesigned our site.
Doesn't that look awesome?
You're like, yeah, the CSS selectors
longer pull up the thing. So yeah, yeah. So that's also on the scraping part. If it's
last commit is like a while ago. Yeah, it might. It could be broken. Maybe not. Yeah, sure.
All right. Let's see some more. It is, I think, in the stats bomb API, there's an official
package. It's also cool that stats bomb provides an open source package for accessing their data.
Yeah, what is Statsbomb? I see that showing up in many places on these different packages.
Yes, Statsbomb is, I think, one of the leading providers of event data in football,
and I think in both football and soccer and in football. So they provide event data, so
everything that happens on the pitch, like passes, dribbles, interceptions, everything.
They are also one of the providers of the open data sets.
- Okay, yeah, free data selection, that's cool.
- Yeah.
- They claim themselves as a data champions.
- Yeah, I think that data is pretty good.
I'm thinking also one of the best in the market right now.
But okay, at least that's what I heard from some users that
are sure to even have courses, modern scouting and data driven
recruitment. Okay, that's, that's kind of interesting, isn't
it? Yeah, you also have to figure out how to apply your
data science in your, your job. So how to use it and how to use
data for scouting purposes. Yeah. Yeah. If you work in professional,
a professional sports organization or even college sports, the U S at least,
there's a lot of recruiting people from lower levels.
Yeah, that's, I think that that happens in all sports, but,
I think the data is really helping to,
to make the number of players that you have to watch,
from the footage a lot less.
So if you can already, yeah, make a short list
instead of watching 15,000 players,
then yeah, it's really convenient.
- Or maybe you're looking for a particular asset
or a particular part of the play
that a player is good at, right?
You're looking for a quarterback for a football team
that is especially good at running the ball
in addition to just throwing it, right?
you could ask the data for that
and really narrow in quite quickly, I imagine.
- Yeah, and then you have to work with the data,
figuring out how to extract it,
because maybe that single metric
that's really important for you
is not available in the original data set.
So then you have to figure out how to work with the data
and get those metrics out of the raw data.
- Right, right, yeah.
maybe something calculated or inferred.
Yes. That's also one of the things that happens in soccer
based on the tracking data, but it will probably happen
also in football and all the other sports
that clubs will define their own metrics
based on, for example, tracking data and use that
to figure out what players match their own play the most.
Right. Cool.
>> Okay. So yeah, as you can see,
there's a bunch of stats bombs here.
Pi Baseball, an MLB game,
seemed to be a couple of things around baseball data.
Baseball is one of those games that was almost
created by a statistician just so they could come up with stats.
There's so many stats.
People get averages,
What kind of hitter are they?
Well, they're like a 0.3.
They're a 300 hitter.
What are they?
30% and all that.
And I'm not a huge fan of baseball.
I find it kind of a slow game.
It's kind of fun to play, but to watch it, it's like--
same as golf.
I don't watch those things.
I'm sure they're fun to play, but it's just
like in terms of stats, these kind of games,
there's probably a ton of stats here
because it's all about stats there.
I also believe that the baseball data science departments are one of the biggest departments
over all sports.
And maybe, but I'm not sure about it.
You can also make a lot of impact there.
Maybe because also in all the sports, for example, soccer, a lot of things as impact
on the eventual outcome.
And it's also a discussion if all data is available
to, yeah, to know what actually has the most impact.
So that's also one of the discussions
within the soccer analyst community.
- Yeah, for both of these, Pi Baseball and MLB game,
you can see from your Luigi automation.
[LAUGHTER]
>> They're both quite--
well, the MLB game is not particularly up to date.
I guess the Pi baseball one is more up to date.
But 13 contributors, 30 contributors.
>> That's quite a lot.
And the Pi baseball was updated this month.
But when I saw these, I'm like, oh, these are kind of similar.
And then I look at your page here,
and I see, oh, well, Pi baseball is way more up to date,
modern.
you should check that out first, right?
That's the kind of value you get for having that info.
- Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, that's also the intention
that you have a quick overview of, yeah,
how it's maintained it and yeah.
- Yeah, and that one also goes against the API.
So let's see, a couple more.
I guess it's worth giving a shout out to the NFL FastPay.
that NFL's got a lot of data as well.
What else?
There's some college baseball.
Here's one that I think is that shows up across a lot of the different
categories, cause it seems to do a lot, which is fast F one.
Have you seen that?
Have you played with this?
Any.
I must admit, I have not played.
Yeah, it's, it's, I should dig into it because, quite some
contributors, and I think it's really interesting to, to also
to see the motor sports or cycling or more those sports
to see what they are doing, how they are doing it.
- Yeah, I noticed looking through here
that there's not a lot of motor sports
compared to the other sports.
And so people are, if you're out there,
like if you're an IndyCar or if you're a motocross
or somewhere like, and you've got a package,
just shoot it over to these guys
and have them put it in the list.
That'd be cool.
Yeah, the Fast F1, they've got a page here
that has a bunch of things.
It has access to timing data, telemetry, session results.
And all the data is provided in an extended Panda data,
Panda's DataFrame format, which is pretty cool, right?
Integration with Matplotlib.
There's an examples gallery too.
You come over here and you can see it has things
like position changes during the race.
So this, it'll say, if you go up here,
It'll do things like, you gotta go farm it,
you know, go to the, get season 23, race one,
or for race, I guess, rather than practice or qualifying.
And that's Bahrain.
And so then here's, you know, it has all the drivers,
their time throughout the race, their position.
You can see probably pit stop.
There's a lot of cool stuff you can see.
- Yeah, it looks really nice.
And also with those examples,
I think that's really helpful to get people started
with those packages.
- Yeah, it's not exactly a Jupyter notebook.
It's the HTML of a Jupyter notebook,
but it's still exactly what you need, right?
- But I think you can even download it.
- You can download it right there, absolutely, yeah.
Yeah, and apparently it took two and a half seconds
to generate the script.
Let's see, you even got cool visualizations
like on the track, color it by speed
around the tracks of the story.
There's a lot of cool data here.
- Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I'm not really sure why I haven't seen this one
before, but yeah, it looks really, really cool.
- Yeah, when I looked, I looked around a couple
of the different packages and this one,
like the documentation and examples and stuff
seem super good.
Okay, so that's the scrapers.
There's many more, there's plenty more there.
Another one, models, calculators,
maybe take us through some of the ones
that stand out in this category.
Like for example, there's Lori's code
for MetroCode tracking data.
I love it that it's just, it's Lori's code.
Good job, Lori.
(laughing)
- Yeah.
Yeah, so this is mostly about how to also do all kinds
of modeling on top of it, do predictions on top of data.
You know, one of the patches
that I think is pretty interesting is the soccer action.
Yeah, of course, again, it's soccer.
Soccer actually isn't, oh, it's not on the list.
This is also--
- It might, it's only Python, possibly.
But for example, they have soccer XG,
which is, what is that, XG boost model?
- That's the expected goals.
So what's the expected value for a certain shot,
if it should go in or not.
So it is also based on a position on the page,
how many players are between the player with the ball
and the goal.
So you can use it to determine,
yeah, how, if a player should score a goal
and how many goals he should make from it.
- Yeah, I think this is actually one
of the really interesting aspects is the model
and calculate it, the prediction side is pretty cool.
- And I think there's quite some work to do for PiSport
because for example, the expected goals,
there's also one of the things that I've seen in ice hockey
and also in other sports where you have to score
within a goal.
And I think it would be cool to find a way
to abstract it over all sports.
Yeah, because it is kind of the same idea, probably different datasets, but, right, like
scoring in hockey and scoring in soccer is from a structural perspective of the data
is kind of the same thing, even though it's really, you know, quite different in size
of the goal and how easy it is and all that.
But I think we can still learn from the other sports and see how they did it.
- Yeah, trainable model, but on different data, right?
But same type of model potentially.
- Yeah, maybe some different features, but yeah.
- Yeah, so the next category is I/O
and that obviously stats bomb is in here, right?
Python package to parse stats bombs,
JSON data to CSV, which is cool.
Some on soccer, the spattle format,
which I have no idea what that is.
- Yeah, that's also one of the things
they built to make like atomic data format
that's also kind of standardized.
So there's some overlap between Soccer Action and Kloppy.
And I think they mostly focused on
how to eventually work with the data.
So calculate also the expected threat
and also like a contribution model.
So for every action towards a goal, I was there.
- Yeah, right.
Okay, so maybe there's a takeaway and then a pass
and a pass and then a score.
Like all of those people should somehow get credit
for that potentially, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
- Okay, makes sense.
- But they also build the way to load the data.
And yeah, we're currently also working together with them
to see if we can make Kloppy to load the data
and have the Kloppy package focus on loading it
and standardizing it and then after soccer action using it.
So see how the Lego blocks can work together.
- Yeah, yeah, of course, absolutely.
We have the NFLDB, a library to manage and update NFL data
in a relational database.
That's kind of cool.
- Mm-hmm.
- Yeah.
All right, let's see.
The next category is the visualization.
I think probably the, excuse me,
the most important part is probably
the actual data acquisition,
but the most desired part is probably
the visualization, right?
- Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Yeah, I think also the data engineering part
is not really, what do you call it, really sexy.
I mean, no one sees it.
output is a structured CSV or parquet file. So that's not really cool to show. But for example,
yeah, the MPL soccer, I think it's a really, really nice package used by, I think every
person in the soccer community. Yeah, there's a lot of contributors here. Yeah.
Yeah, and the visualizations look really cool. They also have a huge list of examples.
Okay. So all kind of, you can just copy and paste to create this. I love them. Yeah.
Yeah, we'll actually come back to the pizza charts in just a moment, actually. But yeah,
These are some good-looking visualizations here.
Yeah, and I think the interesting thing about this package is that at some point,
there were two packages that did similar things, and then they decided, well, we should just work
together. And they spent quite some time on integrating those packages, and then there was
one. And I think that's really cool to see that instead of competing, they decided to work together
and make, I think, one of the most awesome packages
for the soccer community.
Yeah, it's really nice.
It's really nice.
There's a lot of soccer ones in here.
There's also one for a PT plot for American football,
although I don't understand what PT stands for.
And then the fast Formula One is also in there.
We already saw those pictures, but a lot of nice visualizations
there.
And is that it for all the categories?
know then there's the open data. Yeah I think maybe when I look at this list
are some missing.
But yeah it's still a bit limited on what the data is available.
And yeah that's something that we should work together also with leaks
to see if there's a way to yeah to make some more data available.
Yeah, they have it and they offer to publicly put it in the list, right?
Yeah, when it's available, I would definitely add it. But there's already some interesting data,
maybe a little bit smaller data sets, but you can definitely use it to start playing around with it.
Cool. All right. So I think that kind of covers the list with the Python filter sort on.
And then we wanted also to give a quick shout out to NFLverse, right? Because while not Python,
is quite a series of packages that does cool stuff in the NFL for that data, right?
Yeah. So it's not Python, it's for the R users. But I think what's really interesting there,
what they did is they created quite some different packages, one for collecting the data,
one for organizing it, one for reading the data, one for doing all kind of modeling, one for
creating the visualizations and I think that's also an example for all the sports on how to
make those packages available, making sure that everything fits together.
Yeah, that's cool. It's under the NFL Virtual Organization, but a bunch of
different projects. You talked about having the data and stuff that's not immediately
obvious or predictable. You might need a higher level sort of thinking about it. And one of them
that stands out here is the NFL Fourth, which studies fourth down decision data
with the NFL version models, which is kind of cool because that's one of the big decisions that a
coach makes and it can make the game or it can lose the game and there's a go no-go decision.
It's not just well they went this far then they didn't make it. It's well it was the they had 30
seconds left in the game and they had to do it or you know because otherwise they were just going
to lose anyway. There's a lot of higher like sort of inference and higher level things you want to
to bring into that rather than just 30% of the time they make it forth down, right?
Yeah.
And this, I think also one of the reason they just build an entire package around it to
work with it.
Yeah.
That's pretty interesting.
Now before all the Python people say, I don't want to learn R, I don't care about R. It
is also worth pointing out that you can call R from Python.
I don't know how much of like the visualization stuff still works super well or anything like
but you can use, what is it called?
Rpy2.
- Okay.
- And you can end up, you just pass it in our file
and then you start calling functions or whatever,
get a function out of it and call that function.
So it's worth, if you really, really wanna use
some of these packages, maybe it's worth doing
a quick little integration and then turn it
into a data frame, pandas data frame
and running with it or something.
- Yeah.
Yes, it looks interesting.
It's definitely worth a try.
- Yeah, it's nothing I've ever used,
but I can see, you know,
if you really care about NFL data
and really care about Python,
it might be worth giving those combos a look there.
- But I think there is one package
to work with their data from Python.
So if you look at the list,
there should be at least one.
I think it's not on their website, on their GitHub page,
but I think there's another one
that integrates well with it.
- Sure, right.
Not under their organization,
but maybe somebody else made.
- Yeah.
- That does, yeah, that's cool.
Excellent.
Maybe they use this integration.
I'm not sure, I don't know.
All right, and then the last thing I wanna talk about here
is interesting on two levels.
So you've got a playground.pysport.org,
which is a hosted notebook to play with some examples,
like in particular, Kloppy and MPL Soccer, right?
- Yeah, so I think one of the issues or challenges
for a lot of people also working within the bigger clubs
is that they don't always have a background in programming.
So often they start as a video analyst
or working as a performance analyst,
and then they think, well, there's data,
want to work with it and if you need to set up your Python environment for the first time it can
be a bit overwhelming. So that's why I thought well there is JupyterLite which is a very cool
project based on Pyrodite. Let's see if you can use it and it is just a start with the
with the Kloppy and the MPL soccer package,
I just fetched the notebook from there,
from my gallery and integrated into this one,
into the playground.
And you can just start playing around with it.
- Yeah, and so here's a proper,
a proper Jupyter notebook using all of their libraries.
And so, but what's awesome about this,
As you said, based on Piledead, I'm not sure necessarily,
actually stuck in people's minds,
like this is running in WebAssembly on our front end, right?
Which is pretty epic.
- Yeah, it makes it really convenient for people
to just start playing around with it
without installing byte and working with virtual environments.
- Yeah, you know how it works.
- It makes it easy for you to host it.
Yeah, it makes it super easy for you to host it
because all you're doing is serving up static files.
You're not hosting, you're not running a Kubernetes cluster
or anything like that, right?
Trying to prevent abuse of it and so on.
- Yeah, so yeah, multiple sites make it good to,
for me and for the people using it, yeah.
- Yeah, for sure.
And it even does that wild, what's it called?
Pizza plot, that kind of style of plot
that we're looking at.
And it runs fast and great.
Yeah, this is really, really nice.
Yeah, are you happy with JupyterLite?
- Yeah, there was some issues with it,
especially around working with fetching data
because some of these try to fetch the open data
from Statsbomb or also some forms and stuff like that.
Yeah, so we had to work around it.
And it is also what you see on top of here
is the patching of the request library
to make it work in Jupyter Lite.
- Yeah.
I think it's better to have a working version
than not patching it.
- Yeah, no, I think it's great.
And then everything that uses requests
can just do its thing.
Yeah, this is really cool.
When I saw that you had this, I thought,
oh, this is clever that it's based on JupyterLite
and it's really nice.
- Yeah.
- And people can check that out.
Maybe people out there listening
maintain some of these packages and have notebooks.
Like if they get them working here,
could they submit them to you and have them?
- Yeah, also the entire playground
is part of the PySports organization on GitHub.
You can just watch, see the report story
and make a pull request.
And I will just review it and merge it
and then it will be available right here.
- Yeah, that's awesome.
- So we're really happy for more packages here,
more examples.
Yeah, more examples would be very welcome.
Excellent.
All right.
Well, I think we're getting pretty much short on time
for talking about sports analytics,
but really, really good work there.
Now, before you get out of here, I have the final two questions
for you.
I always ask.
Notable PyPI package, something you've come across,
like, oh, this library is awesome.
People should check it out.
I mean, it's kind of the whole topic of this show.
So we talked about maybe 100--
we didn't mention them all, but went through a list
of a hundred different Python packages,
but something you want to give a shout out to
that you think is cool out there?
- Yeah, I'm not really sure if the entire Python world
already knows it, but on the last PySport meetup,
I made an example using DukeDB,
and that was something that people didn't know about it,
especially with integration, with the pandas data frames,
that you just build a data frame
and run queries directly on top of it.
- Yeah, I was-- - I heard of DuckDB,
but I didn't realize the pandas kind of direct integration
also has direct parquet query, interesting, okay.
- Yeah, and that makes it quite easy
to also play around with SQL queries.
And I was very happy that I had a presentation
on last PyData Eindhoven conference.
Yeah, I think it's a package that,
No, well, not everyone, but it's really worth checking out
because it can make your life easier.
- Sure.
- I think it's just a Swiss army knife
for data engineering.
Yeah, I think it's a nice one.
- Yeah, great recommendation.
And if you're gonna write Python code,
what editor are you using these days?
- I'm using PyCharm.
So not sure if it's cool.
- I love PyCharm, PyCharm's awesome.
Excellent one.
Yeah, so I guess final call to action,
people are interested in open source sports analytics,
they're open and maybe interested in PySport,
wanna contribute back or be part of it in some way,
what do you tell them?
- Yeah, you can reach out on Twitter or LinkedIn
to see where you can contribute.
And I think it's also,
if you're not working in the sports domain
and would like to contribute, please reach out
because I think the knowledge from outside of sports
is really useful within sports.
So there are a lot of options to contribute
make an even more community,
a more better community.
- Yeah, absolutely.
All right.
Well, thank you so much for being here
and sharing all these projects you've collected.
- Yeah, thanks a lot for being on this show.
It's really, really nice.
Yeah, thank you. - Yeah, you're welcome.
Bye.
- Okay, bye-bye.